README.md, before:

# BOND: Biomedical Ontology Normalization and Disambiguation

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Python 3.11+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)

BOND is a production-grade system for mapping free-text biological terms to standardized ontology identifiers. It combines hybrid retrieval (exact matching, BM25, dense embeddings), reciprocal rank fusion, graph-based expansion, and LLM-powered disambiguation to achieve high-accuracy ontology normalization for biomedical metadata.

## 🎯 Overview

BOND addresses the critical challenge of harmonizing diverse biological terminology across research studies and datasets. When researchers submit data to public repositories like GEO, ArrayExpress, or CELLxGENE, they often use inconsistent or non-standard terminology. BOND automatically maps these "author terms" to standardized ontology identifiers, enabling:

- **Metadata harmonization** across datasets
- **Semantic interoperability** for cross-study analysis
- **FAIR compliance** through ontology-linked metadata
- **Scalable curation** of large biomedical repositories

## ✨ Key Features

- **Hybrid Search Architecture**: Combines exact matching, BM25 keyword search, and dense semantic search (FAISS) for comprehensive retrieval
- **Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF)**: Intelligently combines results from multiple retrieval methods
- **LLM-Powered Expansion**: Uses large language models to generate query expansions and context-aware synonyms
- **Graph-Based Expansion**: Leverages ontology hierarchies to discover related terms
- **Context-Aware Disambiguation**: LLM reasoning to select the correct ontology ID from candidate matches
- **Multi-Ontology Support**: Works with Cell Ontology (CL), UBERON, MONDO, EFO, PATO, HANCESTRO, and more
- **Organism-Aware Routing**: Automatically selects appropriate ontologies based on organism and field type
- **RESTful API**: FastAPI-based service for easy integration
- **CLI Tool**: Command-line interface for batch processing

## 📊 Supported Fields and Ontologies

### Supported Fields

- `cell_type`: Cell types and classifications (Cell Ontology)
- `tissue`: Anatomical structures (UBERON)
- `disease`: Disease conditions (MONDO)
- `development_stage`: Developmental stages (organism-specific)
- `sex`: Biological sex (PATO)
- `self_reported_ethnicity`: Ethnicity/ancestry (HANCESTRO)
- `assay`: Experimental methods (EFO)
- `organism`: Taxonomic classification (NCBI Taxonomy)

### Supported Organisms

- `Homo sapiens`
- `Mus musculus`
- `Danio rerio` (zebrafish)
- `Drosophila melanogaster` (fruit fly)
- `Caenorhabditis elegans` (C. elegans)

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/pankajrajdeo/BOND.git
cd BOND

# Create and activate virtual environment
python3.11 -m venv bond_venv
source bond_venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: bond_venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install -e .
```

### Prerequisites

1. **Ontology Database**: You need an SQLite database containing ontology terms. See [Installation Guide](INSTALLATION.md) for details.
2. **FAISS Index**: Build a FAISS index for dense semantic search:
   ```bash
   bond-build-faiss --sqlite_path assets/ontologies.sqlite --assets_path assets
   ```
3. **Environment Variables**: Configure LLM providers and embedding models (see Configuration below)

### Basic Usage

#### CLI Example

```bash
bond-query \
  --query "T-cell" \
  --field cell_type \
  --organism "Homo sapiens" \
  --tissue "blood" \
  --verbose
```

#### Python API Example

```python
from bond import BondMatcher
from bond.config import BondSettings

# Initialize matcher
settings = BondSettings()
matcher = BondMatcher(settings)

# Query
result = matcher.query(
    query="T-cell",
    field_name="cell_type",
    organism="Homo sapiens",
    tissue="blood"
)

print(f"Matched: {result['chosen']['label']}")
print(f"Ontology ID: {result['chosen']['id']}")
print(f"Confidence: {result['chosen']['llm_confidence']}")
```

#### API Server

```bash
# Start server (with anonymous access for development)
BOND_ALLOW_ANON=1 bond-serve

# Or with API key authentication
export BOND_API_KEY=your-secret-key
bond-serve
```

Then query the API:

```bash
curl -X POST "http://localhost:8000/query" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer your-secret-key" \
  -d '{
    "query": "T-cell",
    "field_name": "cell_type",
    "organism": "Homo sapiens",
    "tissue": "blood"
  }'
```

## 🔧 Configuration

BOND uses environment variables for configuration. Create a `.env` file:

```bash
# Embedding Model (choose ONE of the options below)

# Option A: Use your Ollama encoder (recommended for local)
# Make sure the model is available in Ollama first:
#   ollama pull rajdeopankaj/bond-embed-v1-fp16
BOND_EMBED_MODEL=ollama:rajdeopankaj/bond-embed-v1-fp16
# If running remote Ollama, set the API base (default: http://localhost:11434)
# OLLAMA_API_BASE=http://your-ollama-host:11434

# Option B: Use a LiteLLM-compatible hosted embedding endpoint
# Example: OpenAI, Azure OpenAI, Together, Groq, etc.
# BOND_EMBED_MODEL=litellm:text-embedding-3-small

# Option C: Use Hugging Face TEI (Text Embeddings Inference)
# Deploy your HF model (pankajrajdeo/bond-embed-v1-fp16) behind a LiteLLM-compatible endpoint,
# then set the model name accordingly.
# Example if exposed as huggingface/teimodel (via LiteLLM routing):
# BOND_EMBED_MODEL=litellm:huggingface/teimodel

# LLM Providers (for expansion and disambiguation)
BOND_EXPANSION_LLM=anthropic/claude-3-5-sonnet-20241022
BOND_DISAMBIGUATION_LLM=anthropic/claude-3-5-sonnet-20241022

# Or use OpenAI
# BOND_EXPANSION_LLM=openai/gpt-4o
# BOND_DISAMBIGUATION_LLM=openai/gpt-4o

# API Keys (set as environment variables or in .env)
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your-key
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-key

# Paths
BOND_ASSETS_PATH=assets
BOND_SQLITE_PATH=assets/ontologies.sqlite

# Retrieval Parameters
BOND_TOPK_EXACT=5
BOND_TOPK_BM25=20
BOND_TOPK_DENSE=50
BOND_TOPK_FINAL=20

# Optional: Disable LLM stages for retrieval-only mode
# BOND_RETRIEVAL_ONLY=1
```

### Using Your Published Encoders

- Hugging Face model: `pankajrajdeo/bond-embed-v1-fp16`  
  See model card and direct usage: https://huggingface.co/pankajrajdeo/bond-embed-v1-fp16
- Ollama model: `rajdeopankaj/bond-embed-v1-fp16`  
  Pull first, then set `BOND_EMBED_MODEL=ollama:rajdeopankaj/bond-embed-v1-fp16` and (optionally) `OLLAMA_API_BASE`.

> Note: BOND’s embedding provider currently supports LiteLLM-style endpoints and Ollama natively. If you prefer running the Hugging Face model locally with SentenceTransformers, use it to precompute embeddings for your own pipelines; for BOND’s FAISS build and runtime embedding, route the HF model via a LiteLLM-compatible endpoint (e.g., TEI behind a gateway) or use the Ollama variant.

## 📖 Documentation

- [Installation Guide](INSTALLATION.md) - Detailed setup instructions
- [API Documentation](docs/API.md) - REST API reference
- [Hybrid Search Guide](README_hybrid_search.md) - Advanced search features
- [Reranker Training Guide](RERANKER_TRAINING_GUIDE.md) - Training custom rerankers
- [Benchmark Dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/pankajrajdeo/bond-czi-benchmark) - Evaluation dataset on HuggingFace

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Pipeline Overview

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ STAGE 1: QUERY EXPANSION                        │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ LLM generates synonyms, abbreviations,         │
│ and context-aware expansions                   │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     ↓
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ STAGE 2: HYBRID RETRIEVAL                      │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ • Exact Match (SQLite FTS) → Top-K             │
│ • BM25 Search (SQLite FTS) → Top-K             │
│ • Dense Search (FAISS) → Top-K                │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     ↓
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ STAGE 3: RECIPROCAL RANK FUSION                │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ Combine rankings from all methods using RRF    │
│ with field-aware weighting                     │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     ↓
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ STAGE 4: GRAPH EXPANSION (Optional)            │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ Expand ontology neighbors if confidence low    │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     ↓
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ STAGE 5: LLM DISAMBIGUATION                    │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ LLM selects best match from candidates with    │
│ reasoning and confidence scoring                │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Key Components

- **`bond/pipeline.py`**: Core `BondMatcher` class implementing the full pipeline
- **`bond/retrieval/`**: Retrieval modules (BM25, FAISS)
- **`bond/fusion.py`**: Reciprocal rank fusion implementation
- **`bond/graph_utils.py`**: Ontology graph traversal
- **`bond/rerank.py`**: Soft boosting and reranking logic
- **`bond/server.py`**: FastAPI REST service
- **`bond/cli.py`**: Command-line interface

## 📊 Benchmark Dataset

BOND includes a comprehensive benchmark dataset derived from CELLxGENE metadata:

- **192,916 training examples** across 7 field types
- **1,027 datasets** from CELLxGENE Census
- **Train/Dev/Test splits**: 173,632 / 9,639 / 9,645 examples

**Dataset**: [pankajrajdeo/bond-czi-benchmark](https://huggingface.co/datasets/pankajrajdeo/bond-czi-benchmark)

## 🔬 Evaluation

BOND has been evaluated on the BOND-CZI benchmark dataset. See the `evals/` directory for baseline comparisons and evaluation scripts.

## 🛠️ Development

### Running Tests

```bash
make test
# or
pytest
```

### Code Quality

```bash
make lint
# or
ruff check .
black .
```

### Building FAISS Index

```bash
bond-build-faiss \
  --sqlite_path assets/ontologies.sqlite \
  --assets_path assets
```

### Generating Ontology Database

```bash
bond-generate-sqlite
```

## 📝 Citation

If you use BOND in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{bond_2024,
  title={BOND: Biomedical Ontology Normalization and Disambiguation},
  author={Rajdeo, Pankaj},
  year={2024},
  url={https://github.com/pankajrajdeo/BOND}
}
```

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **CELLxGENE**: For providing the foundational single-cell transcriptomics data used in the benchmark
- **Ontology Providers**: For maintaining comprehensive biological ontologies (OBO Foundry)
- **HuggingFace**: For hosting the benchmark dataset

## 🔗 Related Work

BOND is related to the multi-agent AI system for metadata curation described in the [paper](paper.md). The paper focuses on end-to-end metadata extraction from GEO publications, while BOND focuses on the ontology normalization component.

---

**Repository**: [github.com/pankajrajdeo/BOND](https://github.com/pankajrajdeo/BOND)  
**Benchmark Dataset**: [huggingface.co/datasets/pankajrajdeo/bond-czi-benchmark](https://huggingface.co/datasets/pankajrajdeo/bond-czi-benchmark)  
**Author**: Pankaj Rajdeo

Commit message:

Docs: Add current work section - reranker training, evaluation, and knowledge graph
- Document ongoing BOND reranker training to improve accuracy
- Add benchmark evaluation work in progress
- Mention harmonized transcriptomic knowledge graph construction

README.md, after:

# BOND: Biomedical Ontology Normalization and Disambiguation

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Python 3.11+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![GitHub](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/pankajrajdeo/BOND?style=social)](https://github.com/pankajrajdeo/BOND)
[![HuggingFace Dataset](https://img.shields.io/badge/dataset-huggingface-blue)](https://huggingface.co/datasets/pankajrajdeo/bond-czi-benchmark)
[![HuggingFace Model](https://img.shields.io/badge/model-huggingface-blue)](https://huggingface.co/pankajrajdeo/bond-embed-v1-fp16)

BOND is a production-grade system for mapping free-text biological terms to standardized ontology identifiers. It combines hybrid retrieval (exact matching, BM25, dense embeddings), reciprocal rank fusion, graph-based expansion, and LLM-powered disambiguation to achieve high-accuracy ontology normalization for biomedical metadata.

## 🎯 Overview

BOND addresses the critical challenge of harmonizing diverse biological terminology across research studies and datasets. When researchers submit data to public repositories like GEO, ArrayExpress, or CELLxGENE, they often use inconsistent or non-standard terminology. BOND automatically maps these "author terms" to standardized ontology identifiers, enabling:

- **Metadata harmonization** across datasets
- **Semantic interoperability** for cross-study analysis
- **FAIR compliance** through ontology-linked metadata
- **Scalable curation** of large biomedical repositories

## ✨ Key Features

- **Hybrid Search Architecture**: Combines exact matching, BM25 keyword search, and dense semantic search (FAISS) for comprehensive retrieval
- **Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF)**: Intelligently combines results from multiple retrieval methods
- **LLM-Powered Expansion**: Uses large language models to generate query expansions and context-aware synonyms
- **Graph-Based Expansion**: Leverages ontology hierarchies to discover related terms
- **Context-Aware Disambiguation**: LLM reasoning to select the correct ontology ID from candidate matches
- **Multi-Ontology Support**: Works with Cell Ontology (CL), UBERON, MONDO, EFO, PATO, HANCESTRO, and more
- **Organism-Aware Routing**: Automatically selects appropriate ontologies based on organism and field type
- **RESTful API**: FastAPI-based service for easy integration
- **CLI Tool**: Command-line interface for batch processing

## 📊 Supported Fields and Ontologies

### Supported Fields

- `cell_type`: Cell types and classifications (Cell Ontology)
- `tissue`: Anatomical structures (UBERON)
- `disease`: Disease conditions (MONDO)
- `development_stage`: Developmental stages (organism-specific)
- `sex`: Biological sex (PATO)
- `self_reported_ethnicity`: Ethnicity/ancestry (HANCESTRO)
- `assay`: Experimental methods (EFO)
- `organism`: Taxonomic classification (NCBI Taxonomy)

### Supported Organisms

- `Homo sapiens`
- `Mus musculus`
- `Danio rerio` (zebrafish)
- `Drosophila melanogaster` (fruit fly)
- `Caenorhabditis elegans` (C. elegans)

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/pankajrajdeo/BOND.git
cd BOND

# Create and activate virtual environment
python3.11 -m venv bond_venv
source bond_venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: bond_venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install -e .
```

### Prerequisites

1. **Ontology Database**: You need an SQLite database containing ontology terms. See [Installation Guide](INSTALLATION.md) for details.
2. **FAISS Index**: Build a FAISS index for dense semantic search:
   ```bash
   bond-build-faiss --sqlite_path assets/ontologies.sqlite --assets_path assets
   ```
3. **Environment Variables**: Configure LLM providers and embedding models (see Configuration below)

### Basic Usage

#### CLI Example

```bash
bond-query \
  --query "T-cell" \
  --field cell_type \
  --organism "Homo sapiens" \
  --tissue "blood" \
  --verbose
```

#### Python API Example

```python
from bond import BondMatcher
from bond.config import BondSettings

# Initialize matcher
settings = BondSettings()
matcher = BondMatcher(settings)

# Query
result = matcher.query(
    query="T-cell",
    field_name="cell_type",
    organism="Homo sapiens",
    tissue="blood"
)

print(f"Matched: {result['chosen']['label']}")
print(f"Ontology ID: {result['chosen']['id']}")
print(f"Confidence: {result['chosen']['llm_confidence']}")
```

#### API Server

```bash
# Start server (with anonymous access for development)
BOND_ALLOW_ANON=1 bond-serve

# Or with API key authentication
export BOND_API_KEY=your-secret-key
bond-serve
```

Then query the API:

```bash
curl -X POST "http://localhost:8000/query" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer your-secret-key" \
  -d '{
    "query": "T-cell",
    "field_name": "cell_type",
    "organism": "Homo sapiens",
    "tissue": "blood"
  }'
```

## 🔧 Configuration

BOND uses environment variables for configuration. Create a `.env` file:

```bash
# Embedding Model (choose ONE of the options below)

# Option A: Use your Ollama encoder (recommended for local)
# Make sure the model is available in Ollama first:
#   ollama pull rajdeopankaj/bond-embed-v1-fp16
BOND_EMBED_MODEL=ollama:rajdeopankaj/bond-embed-v1-fp16
# If running remote Ollama, set the API base (default: http://localhost:11434)
# OLLAMA_API_BASE=http://your-ollama-host:11434

# Option B: Use a LiteLLM-compatible hosted embedding endpoint
# Example: OpenAI, Azure OpenAI, Together, Groq, etc.
# BOND_EMBED_MODEL=litellm:text-embedding-3-small

# Option C: Use Hugging Face TEI (Text Embeddings Inference)
# Deploy your HF model (pankajrajdeo/bond-embed-v1-fp16) behind a LiteLLM-compatible endpoint,
# then set the model name accordingly.
# Example if exposed as huggingface/teimodel (via LiteLLM routing):
# BOND_EMBED_MODEL=litellm:huggingface/teimodel

# LLM Providers (for expansion and disambiguation)
BOND_EXPANSION_LLM=anthropic/claude-3-5-sonnet-20241022
BOND_DISAMBIGUATION_LLM=anthropic/claude-3-5-sonnet-20241022

# Or use OpenAI
# BOND_EXPANSION_LLM=openai/gpt-4o
# BOND_DISAMBIGUATION_LLM=openai/gpt-4o

# API Keys (set as environment variables or in .env)
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your-key
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-key

# Paths
BOND_ASSETS_PATH=assets
BOND_SQLITE_PATH=assets/ontologies.sqlite

# Retrieval Parameters
BOND_TOPK_EXACT=5
BOND_TOPK_BM25=20
BOND_TOPK_DENSE=50
BOND_TOPK_FINAL=20

# Optional: Disable LLM stages for retrieval-only mode
# BOND_RETRIEVAL_ONLY=1
```

### Using Your Published Encoders

- Hugging Face model: `pankajrajdeo/bond-embed-v1-fp16`  
  See model card and direct usage: https://huggingface.co/pankajrajdeo/bond-embed-v1-fp16
- Ollama model: `rajdeopankaj/bond-embed-v1-fp16`  
  Pull first, then set `BOND_EMBED_MODEL=ollama:rajdeopankaj/bond-embed-v1-fp16` and (optionally) `OLLAMA_API_BASE`.

> Note: BOND’s embedding provider currently supports LiteLLM-style endpoints and Ollama natively. If you prefer running the Hugging Face model locally with SentenceTransformers, use it to precompute embeddings for your own pipelines; for BOND’s FAISS build and runtime embedding, route the HF model via a LiteLLM-compatible endpoint (e.g., TEI behind a gateway) or use the Ollama variant.

## 📖 Documentation

- [Installation Guide](INSTALLATION.md) - Detailed setup instructions
- [API Documentation](docs/API.md) - REST API reference
- [Hybrid Search Guide](README_hybrid_search.md) - Advanced search features
- [Reranker Training Guide](RERANKER_TRAINING_GUIDE.md) - Training custom rerankers
- [Benchmark Dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/pankajrajdeo/bond-czi-benchmark) - Evaluation dataset on HuggingFace

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Pipeline Overview

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ STAGE 1: QUERY EXPANSION                        │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ LLM generates synonyms, abbreviations,         │
│ and context-aware expansions                   │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     ↓
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ STAGE 2: HYBRID RETRIEVAL                      │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ • Exact Match (SQLite FTS) → Top-K             │
│ • BM25 Search (SQLite FTS) → Top-K             │
│ • Dense Search (FAISS) → Top-K                │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     ↓
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ STAGE 3: RECIPROCAL RANK FUSION                │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ Combine rankings from all methods using RRF    │
│ with field-aware weighting                     │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     ↓
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ STAGE 4: GRAPH EXPANSION (Optional)            │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ Expand ontology neighbors if confidence low    │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     ↓
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ STAGE 5: LLM DISAMBIGUATION                    │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ LLM selects best match from candidates with    │
│ reasoning and confidence scoring                │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Key Components

- **`bond/pipeline.py`**: Core `BondMatcher` class implementing the full pipeline
- **`bond/retrieval/`**: Retrieval modules (BM25, FAISS)
- **`bond/fusion.py`**: Reciprocal rank fusion implementation
- **`bond/graph_utils.py`**: Ontology graph traversal
- **`bond/rerank.py`**: Soft boosting and reranking logic
- **`bond/server.py`**: FastAPI REST service
- **`bond/cli.py`**: Command-line interface

## 📊 Benchmark Dataset

BOND includes a comprehensive benchmark dataset derived from CELLxGENE metadata:

- **192,916 training examples** across 7 field types
- **1,027 datasets** from CELLxGENE Census
- **Train/Dev/Test splits**: 173,632 / 9,639 / 9,645 examples

**Dataset**: [pankajrajdeo/bond-czi-benchmark](https://huggingface.co/datasets/pankajrajdeo/bond-czi-benchmark)

## 🔬 Evaluation

BOND has been evaluated on the BOND-CZI benchmark dataset (192K+ examples). Performance highlights:

- **Embedding Model**: Custom fine-tuned encoder (`bond-embed-v1-fp16`) achieves **92.7% accuracy@10** on ontology evaluation
- **Hybrid Retrieval**: Combines exact match, BM25, and dense semantic search with Reciprocal Rank Fusion
- **LLM Disambiguation**: Uses large language models for context-aware term selection
- **Multi-field Support**: Handles 7 biological field types (cell_type, tissue, disease, etc.) across 5 organisms

See the `evals/` directory for detailed baseline comparisons and evaluation scripts.

## 🔄 Current Work

Active development and research efforts:

- **Reranker Training**: Training a custom cross-encoder reranker to replace the existing retrieval-only pipeline, expected to improve accuracy from ~75-80% (retrieval) to ~85-90% (with reranker). See [RERANKER_TRAINING_GUIDE.md](RERANKER_TRAINING_GUIDE.md) for details.
- **Benchmark Evaluation**: Comprehensive evaluation on the BOND-CZI benchmark dataset (192K+ examples) to validate performance across all field types and organisms.
- **Harmonized Knowledge Graph**: Building a harmonized transcriptomic knowledge graph from BOND-normalized metadata to enable advanced querying, cross-dataset analysis, and relationship discovery in single-cell transcriptomics data.

## 🛠️ Development

### Running Tests

```bash
make test
# or
pytest
```

### Code Quality

```bash
make lint
# or
ruff check .
black .
```

### Building FAISS Index

```bash
bond-build-faiss \
  --sqlite_path assets/ontologies.sqlite \
  --assets_path assets
```

### Generating Ontology Database

```bash
bond-generate-sqlite
```

## 📝 Citation

If you use BOND in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{bond_2024,
  title={BOND: Biomedical Ontology Normalization and Disambiguation},
  author={Rajdeo, Pankaj},
  year={2024},
  url={https://github.com/pankajrajdeo/BOND}
}
```

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **CELLxGENE**: For providing the foundational single-cell transcriptomics data used in the benchmark
- **Ontology Providers**: For maintaining comprehensive biological ontologies (OBO Foundry)
- **HuggingFace**: For hosting the benchmark dataset

## 🔗 Related Work

BOND is related to the multi-agent AI system for metadata curation described in the [paper](paper.md). The paper focuses on end-to-end metadata extraction from GEO publications, while BOND focuses on the ontology normalization component.

---

**Repository**: [github.com/pankajrajdeo/BOND](https://github.com/pankajrajdeo/BOND)  
**Benchmark Dataset**: [huggingface.co/datasets/pankajrajdeo/bond-czi-benchmark](https://huggingface.co/datasets/pankajrajdeo/bond-czi-benchmark)  
**Author**: Pankaj Rajdeo
